This is a regression analysis course.
My name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a professor in the School of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
This lesson is Regression Concepts: Regression Line and Prediction.
Specifically, I will cover the estimation
of statistical inference regression line focusing also on providing
an understanding of the difference between estimation and prediction.
Prediction is however a main objective of regression analysis.
Prediction can be in time, geography, or just simply for
other settings of the predicting variables.
But prediction is not the same as estimation.
This is not only due to the interpretation, but
also due to the uncertainty level of the predicted mean response.
Particularly, the uncertainty in estimation comes from estimation alone.
Whereas for prediction,
the uncertainty comes from the estimation of the regression parameters and
from the newness of the observation as I'll provide more details later.
Let's distinguish between the concepts of prediction and
estimation further. Let's say that we are interested on
the mean response evaluated at this predicting value x-star.
Under estimation, x-star can be one of the observed values that we fitted a model.
The interpretation of this value, x-star, is that the estimated
regression line is the average estimated mean response for
all settings under which the predicting variable is equal to x-star.
Thus, it's true really an average across all
possible settings when we could observe x-star.
Prediction at this value, x-star,
is when x-star is considered an observation under a new setting.
The predicted regression line is interpreted as the estimated mean response
for one setting under which the predicting variable is equal to x-star.
While in estimation, we're averaging across all possible situations,
for prediction, we focus on one particular setting.
When we estimate a regression line, it's a very simple formula.
We plug in x-star in the regression line, and
this is going to be the estimator of the regression line.
Because the estimator of the two coefficients, β0-hat and
β1-hat are normally distributed, so is y-hat, given x-star.
y-hat has a normal distribution and
the expectation of y-hat is very easy to derive.
It's equal to β0 plus β1 x-star.
So this is actually the true regression line,
meaning that the regression line is an unbiased estimator just
like the estimators of the regression coefficients.
The variance is also of the y-hat given x-star is also on the slide.
We can see that the variances increase
as x-star the value for which we're interested to predict or
estimate of the response moves away from the range of
the average of the predicting variable values.
This means that the variance is going
to be smaller at the center of the average and
is going to increase as we go away from the average.
The uncertainty in the estimated ratio line is going
to be higher as the predicted value from x-star is away from the average.
If we want to construct a confidence interval for the new response it's very
similar to one we did before for the estimated regression coefficients.
We centered the estimated regression line plus or minus the t-critical point,
times the standard deviation of the estimated regression line.
Similarly, because the variance changes with x-star,
the confidence interval also will be wider,
the farther x-star is from the mean, x-bar.
If we take several values of x-star and we construct such confidence intervals,
we get what we call the confidence band.
I will show an example in the next lesson.
In contrast to estimation, prediction contains two sources of uncertainty.
Due to the new observation and
due to the parameter estimation.
The second source of uncertainty comes also in estimation of
the response for x-star.
But the first source of uncertainty is because we
are predicting the response under a new setting.
So how does that translate into uncertainty of
the prediction of a new response?
The variation due to the estimation is similar to
the variation of the estimated regression line.
But now we're adding the variation due to new measurement, which is sigma squared.
If we add those up, this is what the formula looks like.
Practically, the difference is that we are adding the sigma
squared to the variance of the estimated regression line.
Now we see that if we combine these two will get a sigma squared times
one plus  1/n plus the difference between x-star and x-bar squared, divided by Sxx.
As a reminder, the formula for
Sxx is the sum of the differences between the Xs and
the average squared differences.
If we want to obtain a prediction interval for a future value y,
this is again very similar for the estimation of the new response.
It is centered at the predicted response, plus or
minus the critical point times the standard error.
The standard error is different again from the standard error from
the confidence interval for the regression line under estimation,
because we have this additional one that we're adding.
This is due primarily to the adding the sigma square to the variance.
Note that a predicted regression line is the same as the estimated regression line.
What is different here again is the standard error.
I'll highlight once more.
The prediction interval should not be confused with a confidence
interval estimated under the estimation.
The prediction interval is used to provide an interval estimate for
the prediction of y, for one specific x-star, for a new setting.
The confidence interval underestimation is used to provide
an interval estimate for the value for the average value of y.
For all members of the population with a particular value x-star,
I'll conclude here that the introduction of prediction and
estimation of the media response.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]