This is the regression analysis course.
My name is Nicoleta Serban.
Professor in the School of Industrial System Engineering.
In this lesson, I will illustrate estimation and
prediction of the main response using an R example.
We'll return to the example of the relationship between sales and
advertising expenditure to determine what inferences can be made on
the prediction of the sales given a targeted advertisement expenditure.
This is a set of questions that we'll address in this lesson.
What sales would you predict for an advertisement expenditure of $30,000?
What is the variance estimate of the estimated predicted sales for this value?
Can we get a lower and upper bound for the sales under this value of advertising
expenditure with 99% confidence level, or with a 95% confidence level?
How did the confidence intervals differ for the two confidence levels?
Let's go back to the summary of the model,
we've seen this summary in a previous lesson.
Over in this slide I added some additional R code.
For the advertising expenditure of 30,000 we will need to replace x with 300.
This is because the expenditure is measured in hundreds.
Thus 300 units corresponds to 30,000 in advertising expenditure.
In order to get the predicted sales,
we replace x with 300 and we get the value of 673,
which corresponds to 673,000 because we measure
the sales in thousands. So one unit of sales, is 1,000.
If we want to compute the variance of the predicted sales,
this is the formula that we solved before from a different lesson.
In this formula we need to input the estimated variance, the sample size,
the values for Sxx, x-star, and x-bar, the average of the values xs.
The estimated variance is the square of the residual standard
error from the R output, which is equal to the mean square error.
MSE is equal to 101.4 square in this case.
The sample size is the degrees of freedom, which is 23 + 2.
We are adding 2 to the degrees of freedom in order to get a sample size,
because we lose 2 degrees of freedom to do the estimated coefficients.
To get the value for Sxx we'll use the formula again from a previous lesson.
In this formula we have with this formula represents the format for
the variance of the estimator for β1.
Recall that the variance is equal to sigma squared divided by Sxx.
And from this formula, we derive that Sxx,
the sum of squared differences between xs and
x-bar is equal to MSE divided by the variance of β1-hat.
So I can use this to get Sxx, which is going to be the estimated
variance of the error terms or MSE divided by the variance of β1-hat.
Both values are available in the output and
this is why its easier to use this formula rather
than actually use the original formula for Sxx,
which is again the sum of squared differences between x minus x-bar.
For the average across xs, we can just use them in function in R.
Now, we plug in all these values into the formula for
the variance of the predicted sales.
And the value that results from this plugin is 14,286.
What are the lower and upper limits of predicted sales for
advertisement expenditure of $30,000 at 99% confidence level?
How would the limits change if you lower the confidence level to 95%?
To derive confidence intervals and prediction
intervals we'll use a command in R code predict.lm().
We first need to set the new data, in this case,
the advertising expenditure equals to 300 units or $30,000.
We also need to specify whether we want a prediction interval, 59 00:05:11,247 --> 00:05:16,547 a confidence interval corresponding to prediction.
Or whether we want a confidence interval corresponding to estimation.
Please note that while R differentiates between confidence intervals and
prediction intervals by the specification of the interval or
equal to confidence versus predict.
In statistics we will refer to confidence intervals in both
the estimation and prediction settings.
Thus, if you are asked to derive a confidence interval, you will need
to first differentiate whether you're deriving under estimation or
prediction setting then use the appropriate input.
The predict.lm() R function also takes as the input
the confidence level of the confidence interval,
being 95% or 99%.
Thus, this will be those intervals that I provided
on the slide.
We'll provide the prediction and
confidence intervals under both confidence levels.
Let's compare the confidence intervals under estimation versus prediction.
You can see that a prediction interval is significantly wider.
This is because we have additional uncertainity due to the prediction under
a new setting, whereas the confidence intervals under estimation
are reflecting an average across all settings for that specific vet.
We also see that when we compare the 99% versus 95% intervals,
we can see that the higher the confidence, the wider the confidence intervals.
Note again that we need to be careful about whether we want to
confidence interval estimation versus prediction.
Just to wrap up, the comparison, the confidence intervals under estimation
are narrower than the prediction intervals because the prediction intervals
have additional variance from the variance of a new measurement.
We also interpret those intervals differently.
The prediction intervals are for one specific setting,
whereas confidence intervals are average across settings that have
the same value for the predicting value.
This lesson concludes the illustration with a data example
of statistical inference and estimation for the regression line.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]