This is the regression analysis course and my name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a professor in a School of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
In this lesson I will illustrate estimation of ANOVA with
two examples using R statistical software.
Let's go back to the example where we're interested in differences in suicide rates
among regions of the countries from which we have data for.
The question that we wanted to address is, what are the estimates for
the mean suicide rates for the different regions of the countries in this study?
To fit an ANOVA model using the R
staistical software we can use the R command aov().
In this command, we need to input the response variable,
the suicide rates for all the countries included in the study
with all of the samples of the responses stacked in one vector.
We'll also need to input the vector of labels, in this case region,
to specify which of the labels correspond to what responses.
To get the estimating means, we can use the model.tables() command in R.
In this table I'm providing you here,
a summary of the output derived from the model.tables() for the ANOVA.
And what we can see here we have the estimated means along
with the samples sizes.
For one particular case, we see the sample size is equal to one.
That means that one region has only one observation.
While we can still run the ANOVA for this example,
I would point out that the sample sizes should be larger than one, for
it to have a reliable pairwise comparison.
We'll get back to this in a different lesson.
Overall, there are differences in the suicide rates across the region.
The question we'll address in the next lesson is:
Are those differences statistical significantly different.
In the second example,
we're interested in the typing speed across three different keyboard layouts.
We want to estimate the mean typing speed
across all three keyboard layouts and compare the means.
Similarly as in the previous example,
we can use the aov() the command along with the model.tables() command,
which provides us the output on this slide.
For layout one, the sample mean is 25.12 seconds.
For the second layout is 29.11 seconds.
For the third layout, it's 24.76 seconds.
Thus there are differences in the mean speed time particularly the second
layout has a much larger typing speed than the other two.
Again, are those statistically significantly different?
We'll have to perform a hypothesis testing procedure in order to address this question.
In summary in this lesson,
I illustrated estimation of the means with two examples, thank you.
[MUSIC]