The study regression analysis course, and my name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a professor in the School of Industrial and System Engineering.
In this lesson I'll introduce the pairwise comparison of the means in ANOVA.
One primary goal of ANOVA might be to determine which treatment
means are bigger or smaller.
One way to do this is to compare all possible pairs.
They're k(k- 1)/2 unique pairs of treatments.
This is called a pairwise comparison.
To begin, we estimate the difference in the means for
a pair mui and muj, specifically mui hat and muj hat.
However, whether the difference is smaller or
larger than 0 is not telling us much, since a variable
than the difference between the estimated means is important also.
Thus, we use confidence intervals for differences to make statements,
statistical statements about pairs of means.
The confidence interval is going to be centered at the estimated
mean difference plus or minus a critical point
times the standard deviation of the estimated difference in the means.
Here, the critical point is now the alpha percentile of the studentized
range distribution, not the critical point of the t distribution, which would
be suggested by the sampling distribution of the difference in the estimated means.
Why do we use the q critical point rather than the t critical point?
The reason is that we want to correct for simultaneous or joint inference.
The q critical point allows for correcting for
multiplicity which means that the intervals are wider.
To compensate for the fact that we are making simultaneous
comparisons among the pairs of means.
When we perform a joint inference confidence intervals,
the confidence of the confidence intervals will decrease,
if we do not perform such a correction.
Consider calculating a 95% confidence interval for
two population means based on two independent samples.
Here we're not interested in the confidence intervals for
each individual populations separately.
We're interested on the simultaneous inference on both together.
This means that their significance level is
(0.95)(0.95) or approximately 90%.
Not the 90% as we initially wanted.
Now, imagine we're analyzing three populations and
we want 95 confidence intervals that are jointly estimated.
If we multiply 0.95 three times we get 0.86, not 95%.
The q critical point for
the pair comparison in ANOVA are not easy to compute.
There are some tables in some of the textbooks,
but I will suggest to use the statistical software to get the confidence intervals.
The R statistical software does have a command that you can
use called the Tukey method developed by the statisticians John Tukey.
Let's illustrate the implementation of the comparison with the first example.
Which suicide rates across the country regions are statistically different?
Recall that we rejected the hypothesis, that the means are equal for
this example, meaning that at least two of the means are statistically different.
There R command you can use to obtain
the pairwise confidence intervals is called TukeyHSD().
For this, you need to input the fitted ANOVA model.
If you want to use a confidence level different than 95%, which is the default
for this command, you need to specify that specific confidence level.
The partial output for this command is on the slide.
I didn't put all the comparisons, since we have a large number of regions,
a large number of groups, hence a large number of pairwise comparisons.
I also discarded from this analysis,
those regions with only one country with only one observation.
The way we interpret this output is as follows.
The first column provides the information of the pairs
of the groups that we're comparing.
The second column will provide the differences in the estimated means.
The next columns provide the law or an upper bounds
of the confidence intervals for the differences in the means.
The last column provides the adjusted p value which gives
us information whether we reject or not the null hypothesis for
each of the pairs of means.
So how can I use this output?
First, you must look at the lower and upper bounds and
identify the confidence intervals that include the 0 value.
For those confidence intervals it's possible for the difference to be 0.
So for example if you look at the difference between them means
we set rates for the first pair, the lower bound is -0.86.
And the upper bound is 15.11.
This confidence interval includes 0,
meaning that the means of those two groups could be possibly equal to 0.
You can also see that the probability or
the p-value adjusted is 0.12, which
indicates that the means of suicide rates between these two regions could be equal.
For this specific p value, we do not reject the null hypothesis of equal means.
Another aspect that we'll look into when evaluating the pairwise
comparisons is identifying the confidence intervals that
have only positive values or only negative values.
For example, the confidence interval comparing the Latin America versus
Eastern Europe only includes negative values suggesting that the mean of
the suicide rates for the countries in Latin America is lower than the mean
of suicide rates for the countries in Eastern Europe.
Let's go back to the second example where we want to compare
the means of the typing speed of the three keyboard layout.
Which mean typing speed for
the three keyboard layouts are statistically different.
Again we can perform a pairwise comparison using the Tukey method.
We have only three pairs, 2 and 1, 3 and 1, and 3 and 2.
For the pair 3 and 1, the third and
the first layout, the confidence interval includes 0.
Which means that the means of the typing speed
of the two layouts is possible is similar.
When we compare layouts 1 and 2 and layouts 3 and
2 respectively, we can see statistically significant differences.
In conclusion, what we learn from this example is that a keyboards type 2 has
statistically significantly higher typing speed
than keyboard layout 1 and layout 3 on average.
It is plausible that keyboard layout 1 and 3 have similar typing speed on average.
I'll conclude here, the introduction of the pairwise comparison in ANOVA.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]