This is the regression analysis course.
I'm Nicoleta Serban, I'm a professor in the School of Industrial and
Systems Engineering.
This lesson is regression concepts, statistical inference examples.
Specifically, I will illustrate statistical inference with a data
example using the R statistical software.
Well, we're returning now to the example on which we're interested in
the relationship between advertising expenditure and sales.
The question we want to address is,
what inferences can be make on the regression coefficients?
To perform statistical inference, we need to find the estimated coefficient
β1 and its variance along with a sampling distribution of β1-hat.
The estimated coefficient of the interest of β0 and
it's variance along with its sample distribution, whether the coefficient β1
is statistically significant and whether β1 is statistically positive.
We'll also learn how to derive a 90% confidence interval for β1.
I'll conclude with an interpretation of the p-value in
the general context in the hypothesis testing procedures.
This is the output of the regression model from a previous lesson.
Using this output, we not only can get the estimated values of the coefficients,
but also the standard errors and p-values for
the statistical significance of the regression coefficients.
The estimated value for β1 is 2.77.
If we want to estimate the variance,
we need to take the square of the standard error.
So this value, the estimated variance, is going to be 0.2794 squared.
The sampling distribution is now a t-distribution with 23 degrees of freedom,
all this data again is available in the output.
The estimated value for
the intercept coefficient is -147 and
the variance estimator, or in fact,
the standard error of the estimator of the intercept is 145.19.
We will need to take the square of this value in
order to get the variance of β0-hat.
Do remember that error output provides standard deviations, not variances,
that is the square root of the variance, not the variance itself.
If we want to test whether β1 is 0,
we can use the p-value provided by R which is approximately equal to 0.
Meaning that we reject the null hypothesis that β1 is equal to 0,
and conclude that β1 is statistically significant.
To test whether β1 is statistically positive,
now we have to change the alternative hypothesis to β1 greater than 0.
For this, we can use the R output that I provided in a previous slides, but
we need to adjust the p-value.
The difference in the p-value for the one-sided test versus
the two-sided test is that the p-value will be based on both the right and
left tail for the two sided test and only on the right tail of the one-sided test.
We can compute the p-value of the one-sided test using the function pt,
which stands for the probability of a t-distribution.
The command is going to give us the left tail, for
evaluating a t-distribution, the probability for
the distribution at the quantile equal to the t-value.
In order to get the right tail of that distribution which is needed for
the test where alternative as the β1 is positive,
would have to take 1 minus this probability.
Because the p-value in this case is very small,
this will lead to the conclusion that β1 is statistically positive.
In order to estimate a confidence interval,
we can use the R command confint().
The estimated confidence interval for
the slope coefficient β1 is here.
The lowest value of the 99% confidence interval is 1.9 and
the highest value is 3.5.
The interpretation of a confidence interval is tricky,
the interpretation is in a frequentist sense.
Specifically, if we have a 99% confidence interval it means that 1 out of 100 times,
the interval may miss including β1 in the interval.
In other words, β1 will not be the confidence interval 1 time out of 100.
But what is a p-value?
P-value is a measure of how rejectable the null hypothesis is.
The smaller the p-value is,
the more ejectable the null hypothesis is for the observed data.
It is not the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis, nor
is that the probability that the null hypothesis is true.
But for further information about the statements about p-value and
how to interpret a p-value, I refer to the source that I provided on the slide.
I'll conclude here.
The illustration of statistical inference for
the regression coefficients using the R software.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]