This is the Regression Analysis course. My name is Nicoleta Serban.
I′m a Professor in the School of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
In this lesson, I will go through one particular data example
to demonstrate how to implement the simple linear regression model.
In this example, we'll study the relationship between inflation rates and
exchange rates to evaluate the economic theory of the purchasing power parity.
The principle of purchasing power parity states that
over long periods of time exchange rate changes tend to offset
the differences in the inflation rate between two countries.
In an efficient global economy, exchange rates would give
each currency the same purchasing power in its own economy.
Even if it does not hold exactly, the purchasing power parity model provides
a benchmark to adjust the levels that exchange rates should achieve.
This example was made available by Dr Jeffrey Simonoff of
the New York University.
The average annual change in exchange rate is the response variable
expressed as U.S. dollar per unit of a country's currency.
It is calculated as a difference in natural logarithm divided
by the number of years and multiplied by 100,
to create percentage change as shown on the slide.
This is approximately equal to the proportional change in exchange rate
over all 37 years producing an analysed change in exchange rate.
The predicting of variable is the estimated average annual rate of change
of the differences in a wholesale price index values for
the US versus another country as shown on the slide.
We'll analyze data for 41 countries including both developed and
developing countries covering the years 1975 to 2012.
The columns include country and
the inflation difference on the exchange rate change over a period of time.
We also have a column specifying whether a developed or the developing country.
We'll explore the purchasing power theory using the simple linear regression model.
Let's begin with the first step in the data analysis using R, we'll first read
the data with the read.table() command in R, where the input is the data file.
We also specify the separator of the data values in the file,
we specify that a data file has a header specifically that the columns have names.
You should check whether the data matrix coincides with the data you read from
the file.
You can find how many columns and rows are in the data using the dim() command in R.
For this example, we have 40 rows which means we have data for 40 countries.
However, initially I said that we have 41 countries.
That is because we'll now add another country, Brazil,
which is an outlier not included in a dataset initially.
I'm adding now this data to the initial data matrix by using the rbind() command.
I'm converting now the matrix into a data frame.
Last, I attached this data using attach() command in order for
the columns in the data matrix to be identified by R as individual vectors.
I'll relabel the column corresponding to type of the country using their initial
denomination, 1 indicates developed and 0 indicates developing.
The reason I'm doing that is because when we do exploratory analysis it's better to
refer to the names of those categories, denominations of those categories.
Next, we'll perform exploratory data analysis for this data set.
One visual approach is by plotting X versus Y.
In this case, X is inflation difference and Y is the exchange rate change.
I recommend labeling both the title, the labels for x and
y axis accordingly, because it's much easier to interplot the graphics.
We also can evaluate how exchange rate varies
with the categorical qualitative variable developed, and
can be done using the boxplot() command in R,
to provide a side by side box plot for
the development of the exchange rate change,
the two plots are in this slide.
What you see from the scatter plot of inflation difference against the exchange
rate change is that there is a cleaner linear relationship between those two.
From the box plot, you can see that there is a significant difference in exchange
rate change among and between the two types of countries, developed and developing.
Let's ignore for now the presence of the outlier and
the fact that there are differences in the response variable across developed and
developing countries, as we've learned from the box plot on the previous slide.
We're going to perform the simple linear regression with exchange rate change
as the response variable and inflation difference as the predicting variable.
The R command is lm(), and for this command the response variable,
exchange rate change is provided on the left separated by a tilda,
from the predicting variable which is inflation difference.
Part of the output from this command is on the slide.
Let's dissect the part of the output that provides information about
the coefficients.
The estimated β0 is -1.51, and its standard error is 0.2941.
The intercept says that if the analyzed
difference in inflation between a country and
the US is 0, then the country has the same
inflation experience as thus the US.
However, the estimated expected change in exchange
rate between any two countries in our study is not 0,
it's actually 1.52%, that is the currency
becomes devalued relative to the US dollar.
The estimated β1 slope is 0.961 and
the standard error is 0.017.
The slope coefficient says that a 1% change in the difference in
inflation rate is associated with the estimated expected value
of 0.962% of point change in exchange rates.
The other portion of the output,
of the summary output that is of interest is the Residual Standard Error and
Multiple R-squared.
This summary gives estimated standard deviation of the estimated sigma.
The number of degrees of freedom is 39, thus, in this case the sample size is 41.
Also the R-squared is high, meaning that 98% of the variability in
exchange rate change is explained by the inflation difference.
Let's go back to the validity of the of the purchasing power parity theory which
says that in an efficient market the intercept is 0 and the slope is 1.
However, we see that the estimates of these coefficients are not
quite what this theory says.
Looking only at the estimated values, it's not sufficient to make
statistical statements about the purchasing power parity theory, however.
We'll need to use statistical inference, such as hypothesis testing.
Testing for β0 equal to 0 means testing for statistical significance.
From previous slides, we can find that β0 is statistically different from 0,
because the p-value provided in the output is approximately equal to 0.
Thus the theory does not hold with respect to the intercept.
That is, that foreign currencies appear to have appreciated less, than
would be predicted by the purchasing power theory since the intercept is negative.
Testing whether a β1 is equal to 1 is a slightly different test under the test for
statistical significance, since the null value is 1 and not 0.
For this test, the test value is 2.14 and
the p-value is 0.038, how did we get those values?
For the t-value we're replacing 0 with 1 and
the resulting t-value is on the slide.
I computed a p-value similarly as for the test with a null value equal to 0.
That is we take 2 times 1 minus the left tail of the t-distribution
with 39 degrees of freedom for the t-value equal to 2.14.
The p-value is 0.038, and is small but not very small.
We'd like to see whether p-value is generally smaller than 0.1.
If we compare this p-value with 0.05, we would conclude that
the null hypothesis will be rejected at the significance level of 0.05, but
will not be rejected at the level of 0.01.
Thus, we see violations of the purchasing power parity
with respect to the intercept and possibly with a slope.
Let's see if you again how we can perform the hypothesis testing procedure for
β1 equal to 1, the test that we've performed on a previous slide, but
this time using R.
We're going to use a function, a command from the library car.
Don't forget to install the package, car before using this library.
You can use the command install.packages() to install a package and
the library() command to upload the library into R.
We're using the command linearHypothesis(). The input in this command
is the model called pppa, along with a vector of null values for
the regression coefficients, corresponding to a null value equal to 0 for
the intercept and a null value equal to 1 for the slope coefficient.
Last, the option rhs=1 specifies the type of the alternative hypothesis.
We can also compute the t-value directly by computing the t-value as β1-hat,
minus 1, divided by the standard deviation of β1-hat,
provided those values were provided in our output.
We can compute the p-value as the formula I provided in the previous slide,
but using R we can do 2 * 1 - pt(),
a t-value with 39 degrees of freedom providing the probability of a t-value
distribution where we input the t-value and the degrees of freedom.
If you like to learn more about how to use the pt() command
as well as other commands related to distributions, you can use
the help() command, which will take you to a help page describing the command.
To conclude in this lesson, I provided the implementation
of the simple linear regression model with a specific data example.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]