This is regression analysis course.
My name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a professor in School of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
In this lesson, I will demonstrate how to evaluate the assumptions
of the simple linear regression and
how to evaluate the predictive power of the model using the R software.
I will return now to the example in which
we're interested in evaluating the relationship between sales and
advertising expenditure to address the question.
Do the assumptions of the linear regression model hold?
And what is the explanatory power of the model?
First, we'll review the assumptions of the linear regression and
then evaluate those assumptions using graphical displays.
We also identify outliers using the residual plots.
Then we'll obtain the R squared to evaluate the variability in the sales is
explained by the advertising expenditure.
To review the assumptions or linearity, constant variance,
independence and normality, do the assumptions hold?
One way to evaluate the linearity is
using the scatter plot of the predictive variable versus sales.
This is how to plot a scatter plot of the predictive variable advertising versus
their response verbal sales in R using the plot R command.
This gives us the first plot. To evaluate the constant variance and
the assumption of uncorrelated errors
we can use a scatter plot of the residuals versus fitted values,
which is the second plot.
To evaluate the normality, we can use a normal probability plot.
There are multiple ways you can display the normality plot.
Here, I'm using an R command from the card library.
The resulting plot is the third one.
We can see from the three graphical displays,
that the linearity assumption between advertising expenditure and sales hold.
Also the residuals are scattered around the zero line indicating that the constant
variance assumption and the assumption of uncorrelated errors both hold.
We just see some departure from normality, especially in the tail, which could
be an indication that the distribution of the residuals is heavy tail.
But overall based on those plots, the assumptions appeared to hold.
Do we identify any outliers?
We can also identify outliers using the plots from the previous slides.
In fact, we did not see anything outside of the range of the residuals in
the residual plots,
which is an indication that there do not appear to be outliers in the data.
How much variability in sales is explained by the advertising expenditure?
To quantify the R squared, we can use the summary of the model and
instruct the R squared from the model output using the command in a slot.
The value of the R square for this example is 0.81, which means that 81% of
the variability in the sales is explained by advertising expenditure alone.
This is a large R squared.
We'll rarely see such a large R squared in real practice.
I'll conclude this lesson where I've introduce an example using
the R software in which I've evaluated the diagnostics,
the assumptions of the simple linear regression.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]