This is the Regression Analysis course.
I'm Nicoleta Serban, Professor in the School of Industrial and
System Engineering.
I'll cover Regression Concepts, Estimation Example.
Specifically, I will illustrate in this lesson how to use the R
statistical software, to estimate a simple linear regression model,
and I'll also overview the output from the R statistical software.
In this illustrative example, we're interested in a relationship between sales
and advertising expenditure under a new advertising program.
The first question that we'd like to address is, which is the response and
which is the predicting variable?
So in this example, we're interested in modeling the sales.
And again, the sales can vary with the expenditure in advertisement, but
also with other factors.
Thus in this example, the response variable consists of the sales and
the predicting variable, consists of the advertising expenditure.
Here are a few questions that we will study in this example, we'll fit
the linear regression, we'll identify the estimated regression coefficients,
β0-hat and β1-hat.
Interpret the coefficients, quantify the amount of increase in the sales for
each additional sales in dollars
invested in advertising expenditure, predict the sales for
a specific value of an advertising expenditure, for example $30,000.
Estimate the error variance, and predict the sales for
a very large amount of advertising expenditure, for example $100,000.
The first step in using the R statistical software,
is to read the data from a file into R.
One common function using R is the command read.table(), with which we'll
need to specify the file where the data are, the separator of the data
values in the file, and whether the columns in a data file have names or not.
We'll also want to extract the specific variables from this data.
In this case sales is the first column, and
advertising expenditure is the second column.
Fitting a linear regression model is very simple in R.
We can use the function lm().
We'll need to specify the response variable, in this case, sales on the left.
On the predicting variable,
which is advertising expenditure on the right, separated by a tilde.
What I'm showing you here is the summary of the model. It's a portion
of the summary from which we can obtain the estimated coefficients, the estimated
regression coefficients β0-hat and β1-hat, and the estimated variance.
For this output, the estimated intercept is -157.33,
the estimated slope is 2.77, and
the estimated standard deviation of the error terms,
not the values, is 101.4.
You can see those values highlighted in the output.
Let's go back to the questions we wanted to address.
The estimated regression coefficients from the output, are -157 and 2.77.
Based on those estimates, we can now write that regression equation as sales equal
to estimated intercept, plus estimated slope times advertising expenditure.
To interpret the coefficients, we have to keep in mind the fact that sales and
advertising expenditure are measured in different units.
Sales are measured in thousands, and
advertisings are measured in hundreds of dollars.
Thus, we interpret that the sales increased by $2,770
with each additional $100 on expenditure for advertisement.
Or we can also interpret that the sales increase with $27.7,
with each dollar invested in advertising expenditure.
If we want to quantify, how much more we would derive
in sales with an additional $1000 in advertising expenditure.
Again, we have to convert $1000 in advertising expenditure in
the units used for expenditure, which is equivalent to 10 units,
or 10 $100s. To address question C we plugin,
we plugin the expenditure as 10 units in the prediction of the sales,
as specifically 10 times the estimated value for
the slope, which gives 27.7 units of sales,
or equivalent to $27,700 increase in sales.
Thus, the increase in sales with every additional
$1,000 in expenditure, is $27,700.
Pay particular attention to the units of both the response and
the predicting variables for correct interpretation of a model.
If we were interested to predict the sales of an advertisement expenditure of $30,000,
again, we have to convert $30,000 into original units corresponding to 300 units.
We plugin this in the estimated regression line,
and we obtain $673,000 in sales.
What is the estimate of the variance of the error terms.
Remember, what we get from the output, the R output, is not the variance,
it is the estimated standard deviation of the error terms,
defined in the R output as the residual standard error.
To obtain the estimate of the variance,
we need to take the square of the residual standard error.
In this case the 101.4 squared, which gives us the value of 10,281.
What could you say about the sales of an advertisement expenditure of $100,000?
This expenditure corresponds to a 1,000 units, and is a very large value,
way out of the range of the observed advertising expenditure.
This is the histogram of advertising expenditure, and
you can see that the maximum value we've observed is 650,
or corresponding to $65,000 in advertising expenditure.
Because the value of the advertising expenditure $100,000 for
which would like to predict sales, is much larger and other values we observe.
This is what we call extrapolation.
In this case, we cannot say much about the sales
because it's not within the range of the observed axis.
We can not assume that the relationship between sales and
advertisement expenditure is the same beyond the range of our axis.
It is possible that sales will tip off once advertising expenditure
increases up to a specific value, for example.
In this lesson,
I illustrated the estimation approach with the part of the specific example.
Thank you.
[SOUND]