This is the Regression Analysis course.
My name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a professor in the School of Industrial and System Engineering.
In this lesson, I will focus on the goodness of fit of ANOVA.
The data in the ANOVA model, consists of a response variable of interest observed
from multiple populations differentiated by a categorical variable or a label.
For example, for the analysis of suicide rates,
the categorization could be instead age group, year, weather type.
Let's begin with the model.
In our notation, Yijs, are the responses differentiated across the k categories,
j is the index within group, and i is the index across groups.
The model is Yij equal to mu i which is the mean of
the group i plus epsilon ij as the error terms.
The assumptions in ANOVA are with respect to the error terms.
The constant variance assumption meaning that the error terms
have constant variance.
Independence assumption meaning that the error terms are independent.
And normality assumption meaning the error terms are normally distributed.
And thus the Y is the response data are normally distributed as well.
To diagnose these assumptions, we do not diagnose
the assumptions to error terms because we do not know the means.
Instead we're going to diagnose the assumptions of the residuals.
The residuals are the differences between the responses minus
the estimated means of the individual samples.
If the amount of fit is a good fit,
then the residuals should be scattered around zero randomly in the plot
of the residuals against either the fitted values or just their order.
When we evaluate the assumptions in ANOVA, or the type of residual plots we will
consider, we can plot the residuals for each treatment group to evaluate whether
there is a different variability across the groups.
We can plot the quantile-quantile long plot trivial normality.
We can also plot the histogram of the residual scenery used to evaluate
normality.
If the scatter plot of the residuals is not random, the sample responses
are not independent or the variances of the responses are not equal.
If the quantile-quantile normal plot on the histogram show
departures from normality,
you may consider a transformation in order to normalize the data.
Here's one example for the departure from the assumption of non-constant variance.
You can see here that the variability for
the residuals changes from one group, to another.
We have a much smaller variability for group one than for group three.
This is another example of a departure from the assumptions.
We can see that the results are clustered which may mean that we have
correlated errors.
Now, let's go back to the first example,
where we're comparing the suicide rates across different country regions.
Are the inferences on the means of
the suicide rates reliable?
Is the model a good fit?
In order to address this question,
we'll perform a residual analysis using the three residual plots.
The R code is here, the residual plots we're interested are here.
The first one plots residuals against the fitted means.
We're going to use this plot in order to evaluate whether the residuals
are scattered around the zero line and whether the variances are different across
the groups or whether there are clusters in the residuals.
The second plot is the quantile-quantile normal plot,
where we expect the residuals to line up on the line, meaning that the residuals
will have a single distribution to that of a normal distribution.
The third plot is a histogram of the residuals.
We expect to see an approximately symmetric distribution.
For these examples, the three assumptions hold although we can
see that the normality of the residuals has a longer tail on their right.
I'll conclude here the discussion around the goodness of fit of ANOVA.
Thank you.
[SOUND]