This is the Regression Analysis course, my name is Nicoleta Serban.
I'm a Professor in the School of Industrial and Systems Engineering.
Here in this lesson,
I will introduce the basic concept of the analysis of variance or ANOVA.
And I will cover the simplest version of ANOVA, the one-way ANOVA.
The data in an analysis of variance or briefly ANOVA consists of
multiple samples of data for a response variable of interest,
differentiated in groups or subpopulations described by a category or label.
The simple model is so called, one-way ANOVA.
In one-way ANOVA, we have k different populations or groups.
And for each population we observe a sample of data for
the response variable Y.
We assume that the true mean and variance for the response variable are mu1 and
sigma 1 squared for the first population, mu2 and sigma 2 squared for
the second population, muk and sigma k squared for the kth population.
Based on the data sample of the response variable, we can obtain
the estimates for the mean and variance parameters for each population.
The mean estimate is the sample mean denoted by y bar, and
the variance estimate is the sample variance denoted as s squared.
The overarching objective in the ANOVA is to compare the means across the k
subpopulations.
Are the mean equal?
Which pairs of the means are different?
Suicide is a worldwide phenomena and occurs across all population groups.
Gaining an understanding of the underlying causes,
allows policymakers to develop strategies that might reduce or
minimize suicide in populations that are negatively impacted.
In this first illustrative example of one-way ANOVA,
the population of interest consists of population across multiple countries for
which we observe the rate of suicide for the population within each country.
The countries included in this analysis are grouped by region.
One can examine how suicide rates vary by region across the world.
One approach to evaluate or
study the response variable with respect to a categorical variable,
in this case, the region of the countries, is to use the side-by-side boxplot.
That is, for each category plot a single boxplot of the response variable.
And we compare the boxplots across all categories,
in this example, across all regions.
Because we have multiple categories in this example, we have multiple boxplots.
We may be interested to address the following question.
Is there a difference in the suicide rate by region of the country?
Which regions have lower suicide rates?
To answer these questions, we compare whether the mean suicide rates across
all regions are different, particularly in ANOVA.
We will compare the within variability to the between variability of
the response data.
The within variability is the variability within the regions,
visually can be assessed by the variability within each boxplot.
The between variability is the variability between the means across the groups
proxy by the middle lines in the boxplot.
We'll find significant difference across the means
if the between variability is larger than within variability.
In a second example,
we're interested in the typing speed of three computer keyboards
layouts by determining whether there are differences in the respective mean speed.
Is there a difference in the time taken to perform a test across the three layouts?
Which layout is more effective?
If we compare the three layouts using the side-by-side boxblots, we can see that
the second layout has a much higher mean speed as compared to layouts 1 and 3.
But this comparison based on the boxplot is only a visual assessment and
it doesn't provide statistical statements whether those differences
are statistically significant.
In ANOVA, the primary objectives are as follows.
Analyze the variability in the data using the ANOVA table.
That means, we compare the variability within
each group to the variability between the means.
We represent all the information in a table,
laying out all the components needed to make this comparison.
We also use this analysis of variance in order to test whether the means are equal.
Specifically we'll test the null hypothesis that all means are equal
versus the alternative that at least two of the means are not equal.
The third objective is to estimate confidence intervals for
all the pairs of means in order to identify which of the means are not
equal or which of the means are statistically significantly different.
Specifically we'll consider hypothesis testing procedure for
each of the pairs of means with the null hypothesis that
the means in the pair are equal versus the alternative that they are not equal.
We'll perform all the hypothesis test across all pairs jointly.
In summary, in this lesson, I introduced the basics of ANOVA.
Thank you.
[SOUND]